Student Code of Conduct

To attend the March Break Math Camp, we require you to read and agree by our Student Code of Conduct.This Code of Conduct highlights behaviour policies to keep everyone safe.This Code outlines our general expectations on behaviour and the consequences of violating the codes. Violations of the codes are divided into “Major” and “Minor” categories. Incidents may be categorized as either “Major” or “Minor” by camp staff depending on the context.Major OffencesThese offences are considered major as they break, or attempt to break, the Student Code of Conduct as informed by Ontario and Federal law, the Ontario Camping Association standards, and University of Toronto policy. This includes, but is not limited to:Disciplinary ActionMajor OffencesAll major offences will result in immediate expulsion. The police may be called. Students will be asked to leave immediately and the cost of their return home will be the sole responsibility of the student and their parent/guardian. Refunds will not be issued.Student will be issued a written warning. Parents may be contacted. Students and parents will also be cautioned that a second offence could result in expulsion.Second Minor OffenceA meeting will be called between the student, a camp staff member and a representative of the Department of Mathematics to determine the action to be taken. Parents will be contacted. If an alternative solution cannot be agreed upon, the student will be asked to leave the program im- mediately and the cost of their return home will be the sole responsibility of the student and their parent/guardian. Refunds will not be issued.If a student is allowed to stay after the second offence and a third offence occurs, the student will be asked to leave the program immediately and the cost of their return home will be the sole responsibility of the student and their parent/guardian. Refunds will not be issued.All students are expected to participate and be on time for all activities. Students who do not wish to participate in a particular event must inform the staff in order to work out a mutually-beneficial outcome in accordance with camp policies.Boundary PolicyFor lunches, any students over 16 years old and in groups of 3 or more (each group member must meet this minimum age requirement) may travel to on campus/nearby locations, with permission from supervisors. Students must stay in the boundaries of Bloor to Yonge to Dundas to Spadina. All students are to stay with the group at all times unless otherwise specified by the staff on duty.— abusive (physical, sexual, emotional) or violent behaviour, including harassment and bul- lying, towards any member of the residences or staff;— dropping or throwing objects, such as bottles or food, from, at or within the classrooms/ residences;Third Minor Offence— sexist, racist or homophobic behaviour which is likely to promote or produce an atmo- sphere of hostility or intolerance in the classrooms/residences;— inappropriate physical contact;— possession of illegal drugs;Absences & Attendance— being under the influence of illegal drugs;— a minor (under 19) in possession of alcohol;— a minor (under 19) under the influence of alcohol;— anyone above the age of majority (19) providing alcohol to underage students; — possession of weapons, firearms or explosive devices;— vandalism or destruction of property.Minor OffencesA minor offence will be judged as any violation of the Student Code of Conduct that does not carry a criminal charge and does not pose a serious safety risk. This includes, but is not limited to:— skipping classes;— failure to cooperate with requests from camp staff members; — unsanitary behaviour;— leaving a scheduled activity without permission;